Problem Solving 15:

Problem Statement: SSO Authentication Breaks Due to Proxy Layer Interference Between IdP and SP
In an enterprise SSO setup, authentication requests and responses between the Identity Provider (IdP) and the Service Provider (SP) pass through one or more reverse proxies, 
load balancers, or API gateways.

While SSO flows (such as SAML or OpenID Connect) are initially working, intermittent or environment-specific issues arise:

Users experience failed logins, particularly after redirection.

SAML assertions or JWT tokens fail signature validation.

Post-authentication responses are truncated or malformed.

HTTPS links unexpectedly redirect to HTTP, or vice versa.

The IdP rejects authentication requests due to incorrect ACS (Assertion Consumer Service) URLs.

After investigation, the issue is traced not to the IdP or SP directly, but to misconfiguration or limitations in the proxy layer, which alters or strips critical information in transit.



🧾 Root Cause Analysis:
Proxies and gateways often interfere with SSO flows by:

Stripping or Overwriting Headers:
Headers like X-Forwarded-For, X-Forwarded-Proto, or Host are essential for reconstructing the correct request URL at the SP.
Incorrect or missing headers cause the SP to generate the wrong ACS URL or redirect URI, breaking the trust handshake.

Protocol Downgrade (HTTPS to HTTP):
If the proxy terminates TLS but forwards requests over plain HTTP to the backend, the SP may see an insecure protocol and generate insecure SAML/OIDC endpoints, which the IdP rejects.

Request Body or URL Encoding Alteration:
Some proxies modify or incorrectly decode SAML POST payloads, truncating base64-encoded data or corrupting URL-encoded assertions.

Timeouts and Payload Size Limits:
Proxies may enforce size or time limits on requests/responses, silently dropping large SAML assertions or token responses.

Incorrect Public URL Mapping:
The SP thinks it's hosted at http://internal.app.local, while the IdP is expecting it at https://app.company.com, causing mismatched redirect URIs or entity IDs.



✅ Solution: Configure Proxy and SP for Secure, SSO-Compatible Traffic Handling

1. Preserve Critical Forwarding Headers
Ensure X-Forwarded-For, X-Forwarded-Proto, and Host headers are forwarded intact to the SP.

Configure the SP to trust these headers (e.g., in Spring Boot: server.use-forward-headers=true).

2. Enforce HTTPS Consistency
Terminate TLS at the proxy edge, and signal to the backend that the original request was HTTPS (via X-Forwarded-Proto: https).

Ensure generated metadata and redirect URIs use HTTPS to match IdP expectations.

3. Adjust Request and Response Size Limits
Increase payload size limits on the proxy (e.g., client_max_body_size in NGINX, maxRequestSize in Spring).

Allow sufficient timeout windows for IdP-SP round-trips.

4. Align Internal and External URLs
Use external URL mapping or context path rewriting so that SP-generated URLs match what the IdP expects (e.g., via ProxyPassReverse in Apache or server.forward-headers-strategy in Spring).

5. Test in Proxy Context
Always validate SSO flows through the actual proxy setup, not just in local or direct environments.

Use tools like SAML-tracer, browser dev tools, and curl to capture and inspect headers and payloads end-to-end.



🛠️ Example: NGINX Reverse Proxy Fix for SAML Service Provider
location / {
    proxy_pass http://internal-sp:8080;
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
}


And in the backend (e.g., Spring Boot):
server.use-forward-headers=true
server.forward-headers-strategy=framework


📌 Conclusion:
SSO integrations often fail not because of bad IdP or SP configurations, but due to proxy layers acting as "invisible middlemen" that mangle security-critical data. 
Proper header forwarding, HTTPS enforcement, and request size handling are vital to preserving the integrity of SSO flows. By making proxies SSO-aware, organizations 
can ensure secure and reliable identity propagation across complex network layers.





